initial waypoint guide (#15007)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ambient/usage/waypoint/index.md

test: no
---

Ambient splits Istio’s functionality into two distinct layers, a secure overlay layer and a Layer 7 processing layer.
The waypoint proxy is an optional component that is Envoy-based and handles L7 processing for different resources.
What is unique about the waypoint proxy is that it runs outside of the application pod. A waypoint proxy can install,
upgrade, and scale independently from the application, as well as reduce operational costs. When deploying a waypoint,

> you can configure the waypoint to process traffic for different resource types such as `service` or `workload` or `all`.

Reviewer: `none` too (for testing purposes)

Reviewer: And maybe mention that `service` is default.

Author: mentioned multiple times below :) didn't feel we need to mention none here as it is mainly for testing but it was mentioned in the `Deploy a waypoint proxy` section

## Do you need a waypoint proxy?

> ## Deploy a waypoint proxy

Reviewer: Would this section be the one that mentions the `--waypoint-for` annotation?

Author: yes! label btw :)

Reviewer: Ahh ok, that[ just changed](https://github.com/istio/istio/commit/3a34027b570e513f407c6a4de8af58ed16969e7d)! Didn't realize, thank you (:

test: no
---

Ambient splits Istio’s functionality into two distinct layers, a secure overlay layer and a Layer 7 processing layer.
The waypoint proxy is an optional component that is Envoy-based and handles L7 processing for different resources.
What is unique about the waypoint proxy is that it runs outside of the application pod. A waypoint proxy can install,
upgrade, and scale independently from the application, as well as reduce operational costs. When deploying a waypoint,
you can configure the waypoint to process traffic for different resource types such as `service` or `workload` or `all`.

## Do you need a waypoint proxy?

This layered approach of ambient allows users to adopt Istio in a more incremental fashion, smoothly transitioning from no mesh, to the secure overlay, to full L7 processing. If your applications require any of the following L7 mesh functions, you will need to use waypoint proxy for your applications:

{{< image width="100%"
link="L7-processing-layer.png"
caption="L7 processing layer"
>}}

## Deploy a waypoint proxy

> Waypoint proxies can process traffic for `service`, `workload` or `all`. You can also configre your waypoint proxy to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Waypoint proxies can process traffic for `service`, `workload` or `all`. You can also configure your waypoint proxy to
```

  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
{{< /text >}}

Note the Gateway resource has `istio-waypoint` as `gatewayClassName` which indicates it is a waypoint provided by Istio. The
Gateway resource is labeled with `istio.io/waypoint-for: service`, indicating the waypoint can process traffic for services,
which is the default.

To deploy a waypoint proxy for the `default` namespace, use the command below:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl x waypoint apply -n default
waypoint default/namespace applied
{{< /text >}}

Or, you can deploy the generated Gateway resource from the `istioctl x waypoint generate` command to your Kubernetes cluster:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  labels:
    istio.io/waypoint-for: service
  name: waypoint
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
EOF
{{< /text >}}

To config your waypoint to process traffic differently than the default `service`, you can modify the `istio.io/waypoint-for` label
value to the desired value (`workload` or `all` or `none`). For example, the command below deploys a waypoint proxy for the

> `default` namespace that can process `all` traffic in the namespace declaractively using the Kubernetes Gateway resource:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`default` namespace that can process `all` traffic in the namespace declaratively using the Kubernetes Gateway resource:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  labels:
    istio.io/waypoint-for: all
  name: waypoint
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
EOF
{{< /text >}}

Or use the `istioctl x waypoint apply` command with the `--for` parameter such as `istioctl x waypoint apply -n default --for all`.

After the Gateway resource is applied, Istiod will monitor the resource, deploy and manage the corresponding waypoint deployment and service for users automatically.

## Use a waypoint proxy

When a waypoint proxy is deployed, it is not used by any resource until you explicitly configure your resource to use it. You can label your resource such as namespace, service or pods with the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label to use a waypoint. We recommend
to start with namespace waypoint proxy first. To enable a specific namespace such as the `default` namespace for a waypoint proxy,

> simply add the `--enroll-namespace` param to your `istioctl x waypoint apply` command, which labels the namespace with `istio.io/use-waypoint: waypoint` for you automatically:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
simply add the `--enroll-namespace` parameter to your `istioctl x waypoint apply` command, which labels the namespace with `istio.io/use-waypoint: waypoint` for you automatically:
```

$ kubectl label service reviews istio.io/use-waypoint=reviews-svc-waypoint
service/reviews labeled
{{< /text >}}

For any requests from any pods in ambient to the `reviews` service, the requests must go through the `reviews-svc-waypoint` for L7 processing and policy enforcement.

### Configure a specific pod with its own waypoint

Deploy a waypoint called `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint` for the `reviews-v2` pod:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl x waypoint apply -n default --name reviews-v2-pod-waypoint
waypoint default/reviews-v2-pod-waypoint applied
{{< /text >}}

Label the `reviews-v2` pod to use the `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint` waypoint:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl label pod -l version=v2,app=reviews istio.io/use-waypoint=reviews-v2-pod-waypoint
pod/reviews-v2-5b667bcbf8-spnnh labeled
{{< /text >}}

For any requests from any pods in ambient to the `reviews-v2` pod IP, the requests must go through the `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint`
for L7 processing and policy enforcement.

## Attach L7 policies to the waypoint proxy

The following L7 policies are supported for waypoint proxy:

|  Name  | Feature Status | Policy Attachment |
| --- | --- | --- |
| HTTPRoute | Beta | `parentRefs` |

> | TCPRoute | Beta | `parentRefs` |

Reviewer 2: TCPRoute needs to go into dictionary

Author: updated

| AuthorizationPolicy | Beta | `targetRefs` |

> | RequestAuthentication | Beta | `targetRefs` |

Reviewer 2: RequestAuthentication needs to go into dictionary

    apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
    kind: AuthorizationPolicy
    metadata:
      name: viewer
      namespace: default
    spec:
      targetRefs:
      - kind: Gateway
        group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
        name: waypoint
      action: ALLOW
      rules:
      - from:
        - source:
            namespaces: ["default"]
        to:
        - operation:
            methods: ["GET"]
    EOF
    {{< /text >}}

## Attach a L7 policy to a specific service

To attach a L7 policy to a specific service within the waypoint, set `Service` as the `parentRefs` or `targetRefs` value. The example below shows how to apply
the `reviews` HTTPRoute to the `reviews` service in the `default` namespace:

    {{< text yaml >}}
    $ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
    apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: HTTPRoute
    metadata:
      name: reviews
    spec:
      parentRefs:
      - group: ""
        kind: Service
        name: reviews
        port: 9080
      rules:
      - backendRefs:
        - name: reviews-v1
          port: 9080
          weight: 90
        - name: reviews-v2
          port: 9080
          weight: 10
    EOF
    {{< /text >}}

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

istio-system      Active   24h
default           Active   24h   ambient
{{< /text >}}

Waypoint proxies are deployed declaratively using Kubernetes Gateway resources or the helpful istioctl command. You can
preview the generated Kubernetes Gateway resource, for example, the command below generates a waypoint proxy named `waypoint` for the
`default` namespace that can process traffic for services in the namespace:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl x waypoint generate -n default
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  labels:
    istio.io/waypoint-for: service
  name: waypoint
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
{{< /text >}}

Note the Gateway resource has `istio-waypoint` as `gatewayClassName` which indicates it is a waypoint provided by Istio. The
Gateway resource is labeled with `istio.io/waypoint-for: service`, indicating the waypoint can process traffic for services,
which is the default.

To deploy a waypoint proxy for the `default` namespace, use the command below:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl x waypoint apply -n default
waypoint default/namespace applied
{{< /text >}}

> Or, you can deploy the generated Gateway resource from the `istioctl x waypoint generate` command to your Kubernetes cluster:

Author: all should be updated

test: no
---

Ambient splits Istio’s functionality into two distinct layers, a secure overlay layer and a Layer 7 processing layer.

> The waypoint proxy is an optional component that is Envoy-based and handles L7 processing for different resources.

Author: I think it is okay to phrase it as deployment of Envoy, only caveat is that this is not upstream envoy, it is based on envoy proxy... i think that is why it is worded as Envoy-based.

What is unique about the waypoint proxy is that it runs outside of the application pod. A waypoint proxy can install,
upgrade, and scale independently from the application, as well as reduce operational costs. When deploying a waypoint,

> you can configure the waypoint to process traffic for different resource types such as `service`, `workload`, or `all`.

Author: I think this is reasonable, I'll accept it, i do want to add services as waypoint is mainly designed for services.

## Do you need a waypoint proxy?

This layered approach of ambient allows users to adopt Istio in a more incremental fashion, smoothly transitioning from no mesh, to the secure overlay, to full L7 processing. If your applications require any of the following L7 mesh functions, you will need to use waypoint proxy for your applications:

{{< image width="100%"
link="L7-processing-layer.png"
caption="L7 processing layer"

> >}}

Author: Thanks, i thought about it too, thought could be optimized later on.  Glad you did it!!

> ## Deploy a waypoint proxy

Reviewer 3: Longer term this is probably something the gateway class the waypoint is based on will define for _most_ use cases. If, for instance, a certain waypoint impl can only handle service traffic then the gateway class would ideally have the correct waypoint-for label and a typical use case wouldn't need to consider it.

> ## Deploy a waypoint proxy

Author: > Can this section please start with an overview of how waypoint proxies are deployed and configured separately?

I moved a sentence from later to here to explain this.

Waypoint proxies can process traffic for `service`, `workload`, or `all`. You can also configure your waypoint proxy to
process `none` of the traffic, which is primarily used for testing purpose as you incrementally add a waypoint proxy to
your application.

> Before you deploy a waypoint proxy for a specific namespace, confirm the namespace is labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode: ambient`:

Author: I would highly recommend users to label ns ambient first. I think it is not required but it is where things most tested.

> Before you deploy a waypoint proxy for a specific namespace, confirm the namespace is labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode: ambient`:

Reviewer 3: right now the waypoint **must** be the the same namespace as the svc/wl it will serve. longer term we would like to be able to have reference grants allowing cross namespace waypoint use but that will not be in this release.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get ns -L istio.io/dataplane-mode
NAME              STATUS   AGE   DATAPLANE-MODE
istio-system      Active   24h
default           Active   24h   ambient
{{< /text >}}

Waypoint proxies are deployed declaratively using Kubernetes Gateway resources or the helpful istioctl command. You can
preview the generated Kubernetes Gateway resource, for example, the command below generates a waypoint proxy named `waypoint` for the
`default` namespace that can process traffic for services in the namespace:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl experimental waypoint generate -n default
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  labels:

>     istio.io/waypoint-for: service

Author: It relates type of traffic the waypoint can process, which is explained in ambient API: https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/#ambient-labels

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  labels:
    istio.io/waypoint-for: service
  name: waypoint
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
EOF
{{< /text >}}

To config your waypoint to process traffic differently than the default `service`, you can modify the `istio.io/waypoint-for` label
value to the desired value (`workload`, `all`, or `none`). For example, the command below deploys a waypoint proxy for the
`default` namespace that can process `all` traffic in the namespace declaratively using the Kubernetes Gateway resource:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  labels:
    istio.io/waypoint-for: all
  name: waypoint
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
EOF
{{< /text >}}

Or use the `istioctl experimental waypoint apply` command with the `--for` parameter such as `istioctl experimental waypoint apply -n default --for all`.

> After the Gateway resource is applied, Istiod will monitor the resource, deploy and manage the corresponding waypoint deployment and service for users automatically.

Author: I don't feel strongly - i saw in other places we use lowercase deployment as well.

> ## Use a waypoint proxy {#useawaypoint}

Author: I don't think this is entirely correct, because it could be service, not just workload.

When a waypoint proxy is deployed, it is not used by any resource until you explicitly configure your resource to use it. You can label your resource such as namespace, service or pods with the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label to use a waypoint. We recommend
to start with namespace waypoint proxy first. To enable a specific namespace such as the `default` namespace for a waypoint proxy,

> simply add the `--enroll-namespace` parameter to your `istioctl experimental waypoint apply` command, which labels the namespace with `istio.io/use-waypoint: waypoint` for you automatically:

Author: Yes because it is the default and uses minimal resource.

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl experimental waypoint apply -n default --enroll-namespace
waypoint default/waypoint applied
namespace default labeled with "istio.io/use-waypoint: waypoint"
{{< /text >}}

Or you can add the `istio.io/use-waypoint: waypoint` label to the `default` namespace using `kubectl`:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl label ns default istio.io/use-waypoint=waypoint
namespace/default labeled

> {{< /text >}}

Author: An example would be useful imho. Unfortunately `waypoint` is our default-waypoint name atm unless we change istioctl code.

> After the namespace is enabled for waypoint, the waypoint proxy can be used for L7 processing for any services running in the namespace. For any requests from any pods in ambient to any service in the `default` namespace, the requests must go through the `waypoint` for L7 processing and policy enforcement.

Author: No, that is not correct. it has to be any requests in ambient.

{{< /text >}}

Label the `reviews` service to use the `reviews-svc-waypoint` waypoint:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl label service reviews istio.io/use-waypoint=reviews-svc-waypoint
service/reviews labeled
{{< /text >}}

For any requests from any pods in ambient to the `reviews` service, the requests must go through the `reviews-svc-waypoint` for L7 processing and policy enforcement.

### Configure a specific pod with its own waypoint

Deploy a waypoint called `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint` for the `reviews-v2` pod:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl experimental waypoint apply -n default --name reviews-v2-pod-waypoint --for workload
waypoint default/reviews-v2-pod-waypoint applied
{{< /text >}}

Label the `reviews-v2` pod to use the `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint` waypoint:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl label pod -l version=v2,app=reviews istio.io/use-waypoint=reviews-v2-pod-waypoint
pod/reviews-v2-5b667bcbf8-spnnh labeled
{{< /text >}}

For any requests from any pods in ambient to the `reviews-v2` pod IP, the requests must go through the `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint`
for L7 processing and policy enforcement.

## Attach L7 policies to waypoint proxies {#attachl7policies}

> The following L7 policies are supported for waypoint proxy:

Reviewer 2: We normally use "policies" to refer to authn/authz etc; the top 3 here are "request routing".  The following L7 features?

(And with links back to the docs in which they are defined, though I don't think we have those)

Author: I do think http routing policies are L7 policies. Not sure about TCP or TLSRoute but today they require a waypoint so this table is correct to my knowledge.

Reviewer 2: Ahh, this is a new Gateway API thing they didn't consult me on!

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: AuthorizationPolicy
metadata:
  name: viewer
  namespace: default
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - kind: Gateway
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    name: waypoint
  action: ALLOW
  rules:
  - from:
    - source:
        namespaces: ["default", "istio-system"]
    to:
    - operation:
        methods: ["GET"]
EOF
{{< /text >}}

### Attach a L7 policy to a specific service

To attach a L7 policy to a specific service within the waypoint, set `Service` as the `parentRefs` or `targetRefs` value. The example below shows how to apply
the `reviews` HTTPRoute to the `reviews` service in the `default` namespace:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: reviews
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - group: ""
    kind: Service
    name: reviews
    port: 9080
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: reviews-v1
      port: 9080
      weight: 90
    - name: reviews-v2
      port: 9080
      weight: 10
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> ## Debug your waypoint proxies

Reviewer 2: (This will go to its own page too)

Author: Okay with that organization after the content merged

> The debugging guide below assume you have follow the ambient get started [guide](/docs/ambient/getting-started/) to install [Istio with

Reviewer 2: We need to decide if we're writing a debugging _guide_, which talks you through an example, or debugging _documentation_, which tells you how to do it in general.

Sanjeev's first docs were all guides, but I've pulled it apart and made it into documentation.  We will need to do the same here, as someone won't necessarily have followed all the steps above by the time they hit this page.

I also think it would be good to reassemble these into some tutorials, but I'm thinking more like Katacoda.

But this whole section is of less importance so I say let it in as-is (but on its own page) and I'll fix it up later.

    If your source calls for the destination as its service's hostname or IP, use the `istioctl experimental ztunnel-config service` command to confirm your waypoint is used by the destination service. Following the example earlier, the `reviews` service should use the `reviews-svc-waypoint` while all other services in the `default` namespace should use the namespace `waypoint`.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ istioctl experimental ztunnel-config service
    NAMESPACE    SERVICE NAME            SERVICE VIP   WAYPOINT
    default      bookinfo-gateway-istio  10.43.164.194 waypoint
    default      bookinfo-gateway-istio  10.43.164.194 waypoint
    default      bookinfo-gateway-istio  10.43.164.194 waypoint
    default      bookinfo-gateway-istio  10.43.164.194 waypoint
    default      details                 10.43.160.119 waypoint
    default      kubernetes              10.43.0.1     waypoint
    default      notsleep                10.43.156.147 waypoint
    default      productpage             10.43.172.254 waypoint
    default      ratings                 10.43.71.236  waypoint
    default      reviews                 10.43.162.105 reviews-svc-waypoint
    ...
    {{< /text >}}

>     If your source calls for the destination using pod IP , use the `istioctl experimental ztunnel-config workload` command to confirm your waypoint is used by the destination pod. Following the example earlier, the `reviews` `v2` pod should use the `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint` while all other pods in the `default` namespace should not have any waypoints as by default only services use the namespace `waypoint`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If your source calls the destination using a pod IP , use the `istioctl experimental ztunnel-config workload` command to confirm your waypoint is used by the destination pod. Following the example earlier, the `reviews` `v2` pod should use the `reviews-v2-pod-waypoint` while all other pods in the `default` namespace should not have any waypoints because by default only services use the namespace `waypoint`.
```
